---
layout: default
title: Convolutional Neural Networks
---

Convolutional Neural Networks are essential in Machine Learning and it truly marked it's importance in the Machine Learning world when [ATARI](LINK) and [ALPHAGO](LINK).

Here I will try to explain the architecture of the CNN as explained in CS231n course by Andrej Karpathy.The course is really great and helps build intuition of CNN in profound ways.

Let me start by why is there a need for CNN and why it is becoming so popular especially in Visual Recognition related problems.

## Regular Neural Nets do not scale

Suppose we have a 200x200x3 size image(3 is the number of channels - R, G, B) and we input it to our first hidden layer in the regular neural nets.This would lead to a total of 200*200*3 = 120,000 weights.And that is just one layer.As we consider more number of layers, the parameters would add up quickly.Clearly, this full connectivity is wasteful and the huge number of parameters would quickly lead to overfitting.

## 3D Volumes of Neurons

In particular, unlike a regular Neural Network, the layers of a ConvNet have neurons arranged in 3 dimensions: width, height, depth. (Note that the word depth here refers to the third dimension of an activation volume, not to the depth of a full Neural Network, which can refer to the total number of layers in a network.) For example, the input images in CIFAR-10 are an input volume of activations, and the volume has dimensions 32x32x3 (width, height, depth respectively). The neurons in a layer will only be connected to a small region of the layer before it, instead of all of the neurons in a fully-connected manner. This model is actually found in animal visual cortex.Individual cortical neurons respond to stimuli in a restricted region of space known as the receptive field. The receptive fields of different neurons partially overlap such that they tile the visual field. The response of an individual neuron to stimuli within its receptive field can be approximated mathematically by a convolution operation.

[COMPARING REGULAR AND CNN](LINK)


[EXAMPLE](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Performance/Conceptual/vImage/Art/kernel_convolution.jpg)
